---
title: "Between Realms: Exploring the Connection of the Spirit and Material Worlds in Literature and Film"
date: 2024-02-04
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - reading
---
### Some of the best books and films I have been exposed to assume the existence a tangible, earthly domain inhabited by us and an ethereal, spiritual realm reserved for the Higher Being(s) who created the material world. This dichotomy not only shapes our understanding of existence but also influences our emotions and desires, which are tethered to the material world. Many stories invite us to consider meditation - or devotion, which is another way we meditate - as a bridge to the eternal, offering a means to navigate our fleeting, mutable emotions by connecting with the immutable essence of the Higher Being. In this exploration, I will delve into selected works that have deeply resonated with me. There are many good summaries online which I will link here instead of attempting to summarize them myself. Our journey begins with an examination of one of the most profound and complex texts that address this duality: the Bible.

[Matthew 6](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Matthew%206&version=NIV
) is all about prioritizing spiritual values over material concerns, culminating in a powerful admonition directly from Jesus in verse 33:
>  *But seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall be added to you.*

This command to place the kingdom of God at the forefront of our lives stands out as one of the Bible's most lucid directives. The question then arises: how does one embark on this quest? The verses leading up to this provide clear guidance: through prayer - The Lord’s Prayer is cited -, fasting, and “Do not worry.”
Regarded as the most pivotal text in human history, the Bible melds profound spiritual insights with poetic complexity. This combination makes its interpretation both challenging and subject to diverse understandings. Nonetheless, Matthew 6:33 shines through with unparalleled clarity, making my favorite verse.

The Bhagavad Gita offers a distinct clarity compared to the Bible, presenting to us a direct dialogue with the divine. In this scripture, ambiguity is scarce, as readers are given a front-row seat to an enlightening exchange between mortal and deity. Unlike texts that require interpretation through layers of metaphor and historical context, the Gita lays its teachings bare. Each chapter serves as a comprehensive guide on life's workings, with [Chapter 14](https://www.holy-bhagavad-gita.org/chapter/14) emerging as a standout for me. Preceding sections meticulously detail the makeup of the physical realm, setting the stage for a profound discourse in Chapter 14. Here, verses 24 and 25 eloquently delineate the traits of those who achieve calmness of mind. Through the practice of transcendental meditation, they perceive the world's dual nature and by doing so, are freed from the bonds of the material world. The text describes such individuals as unvarying in joy and sorrow, seeing no difference between a lump of earth, a stone, and gold, and maintaining equanimity through praise or criticism, honor or disgrace, treating friend and foe with impartiality, thus transcending the three modes of material nature.

The Pixar animation, Inside Out, masterfully explores the dynamic interplay between the material and spiritual realms. While the film does not delve into the origins of the characters residing within the young protagonist, Riley's, mind, their angelic-like qualities and autonomous nature are evident. These characters simultaneously impact and are impacted by Riley's every action, embodying emotions that guide her through life's challenges. Inside Out serves as a compelling journey into the tumultuous inner world of a growing child who is on the cusp of discovering the deeper, unseen aspects of existence. The narrative skillfully navigates the complexities of emotions and their role in shaping our understanding of both the tangible and intangible worlds. 

Lastly, it's worth venturing beyond the creative realms previously discussed to consider the role of science. Science, for all its progress, finds itself constrained by the methodologies and logical frameworks at its disposal. Our universe, with its complexity extending beyond three dimensions we can observe, presents challenges that current scientific tools, grounded in these dimensions, struggle to fully grasp. Intriguing anomalies observed in quantum physics, for instance, might be more readily understood from the perspective of entities capable of perceiving a fourth or fifth dimensions.

The concept of infinity poses another intriguing dilemma for scientific inquiry. Can anything truly be infinite? While contemporary mathematics may not yet be equipped to handle the infinite, spiritual texts have long ventured into these profound territories. Some scientists even argue against the universe's infiniteness. However, something infinite must exist so a finite universe can be defined —much like the concept of North can be defined as being opposite to South. Theories of parallel universes and a multiverse suggest a vast, infinite, cosmic landscape. In this grand scheme, that infinite cosmic soup, might best be conceptualized as the divine expanse—the Kingdom of God—encompassing all.

<p style="text-align:center">＊＊＊</p>

The exploration of the spirit and material worlds through literature, film, and even science offers a rich tapestry of perspectives on the nature of existence. From the philosophical dialogues of the Bhagavad Gita and the moral teachings of the Bible to the imaginative realms of Pixar's Inside Out, each work provides a unique lens through which we can understand the interplay between the seen and unseen aspects of our world. While science strives to unravel the mysteries of the universe with the tools of logic and observation, it encounters the limits of its reach when faced with the concepts of the infinite and the multidimensional. These limitations highlight the valuable insights that spiritual and creative texts offer, guiding us towards a deeper understanding our place within the universe. As we navigate the finite bounds of our material existence, the infinite realm—whether conceived as the Kingdom of God or the boundless potential of parallel universes—reminds us that there is always more to explore beyond the limits of our current understanding. Through this journey, we are invited to broaden our perspectives and embrace the multifaceted nature of reality, bridging the gap between the tangible and the transcendent.